feat: Rule Performance Statistics for flat ESLint (#17850)
eslint/eslint: docs/src/extend/stats.md

---
title: Stats Data
eleventyNavigation:

>     key: Stats Data
>     parent: extend eslint
>     title: Stats Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    key: stats data
    parent: extend eslint
    title: Stats Data
    order: 6
```

---

While an analysis of the overall rule performance for an ESLint run can be carried out by setting the [TIMING](./custom-rules#profile-rule-performance) environment variable, it can sometimes be useful to acquire more *granular* timing data (lint time per file per rule) or collect other measures of interest. In particular, when developing new [custom plugins](./plugins) and evalulating/benchmarking new languages or rule sets.

For such use cases, the **stats** option has been provided. It adds a series of detailed performance statistics (see [Stats type](#-stats-type)) such as the *parse*-, *fix*- and *lint*-times (time per rule) of a given file or the number of fix passes on top of your [LintResult](../integrate/nodejs-api#-lintresult-type).

As such, it is not available via stdout but made easily ingestible via a formatter using the CLI or via the Node.js API to cater to your specific needs.

## ◆ Stats type

> The `Stats` value is the timing information of each lint run. The `stats` property of the [LintResult] type contains it. It has the following properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Stats` value is the timing information of each lint run. The `stats` property of the [LintResult](../integrate/nodejs-api#-lintresult-type) type contains it. It has the following properties:
```

* `fixPasses` (`number`)<br>
  The number of times ESLint has applied at least one fix after linting.
* `times` (`TimePass[]`)<br>
  The times spent on (parsing, fixing, linting) a file, where the linting refers to the timing information for each rule.

>     * `TimePass` (`{ parse: ParseTime, rules: Record<string, RuleTime> fix: FixTime }`)<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `TimePass` (`{ parse: ParseTime, rules: Record<string, RuleTime>, fix: FixTime, total: number }`)<br>
```

>     An array containing the times spent on (parsing, fixing, linting)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    An object containing the times spent on (parsing, fixing, linting)
```

>     * `ParseTime` (`{ total: number }`)<br>
>       The total time that is spent when parsing a file.
>     * `RuleTime` (`{ total: number }`)<br>
>       The total time that is spent on a rule.
>     * `FixTime` (`{ total: number }`)<br>
>       The total time that is spent on applying fixes to the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * `ParseTime` (`{ total: number }`)<br>
      The total time that is spent when parsing a file.
      * `RuleTime` (`{ total: number }`)<br>
      The total time that is spent on a rule.
      * `FixTime` (`{ total: number }`)<br>
      The total time that is spent on applying fixes to the code.
```

### CLI usage

Let's consider the following example:

```js [file-to-fix.js]
/*eslint no-regex-spaces: "error", wrap-regex: "error"*/

function a() {
    return / foo/.test("bar");
}
```

Run ESLint with the *stats* option (`--stats`) and outputting to JSON via a [built-in formatter](../use/formatters/) (`-f json`):

```sh

> eslint file-to-fix.js --stats -f json

Reviewer: Since the file is named "file-to-fix", it might be more representative to run eslint with `--fix` and get an array with multiple elements in `passes`?

        ]
    },
    "fixPasses": 0
}
```

Note, that for the simple example above, the stats time data in `rules` should be directly comparable to the averages of the first column of the TIMING output. Running the same command with `TIMING=all`, you can verify this:

```bash
$ TIMING:all eslint file-to-fix.js --stats -f json
...
Rule            | Time (ms) | Relative
:---------------|----------:|--------:
wrap-regex      |     0.390 |    71.6%
no-regex-spaces |     0.155 |    28.4%
```

### API Usage

Similarly to the example for the [CLI usage](#cli-usage), we can achieve the same thing using the Node.js API, turning on the *stats* option (`stats: true`) as follows:

```js
const { ESLint } = require("eslint");

(async function main() {
    // 1. Create an instance.
    const eslint = new ESLint({ stats: true });

    // 2. Lint files.
    const results = await eslint.lintFiles(["file-to-fix.js"]);

    // 3. Format the results.
    const formatter = await eslint.loadFormatter("json");
    const resultText = formatter.format(results);

    // 4. Output it.
    console.log(resultText);
})().catch((error) => {
    process.exitCode = 1;
    console.error(error);
});
```

> 
> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## ◆ Stats type

The `Stats` value is the timing information of each lint run. The `stats` property of the [LintResult](../integrate/nodejs-api#-lintresult-type) type contains it. It has the following properties:

* `fixPasses` (`number`)<br>
  The number of times ESLint has applied at least one fix after linting.
* `times` (`{ passes: TimePass[] }`)<br>
  The times spent on (parsing, fixing, linting) a file, where the linting refers to the timing information for each rule.
    * `TimePass` (`{ parse: ParseTime, rules?: Record<string, RuleTime>, fix: FixTime, total: number }`)<br>
    An object containing the times spent on (parsing, fixing, linting)
        * `ParseTime` (`{ total: number }`)<br>
          The total time that is spent when parsing a file.
        * `RuleTime` (`{ total: number }`)<be>
          The total time that is spent on a rule.
        * `FixTime` (`{ total: number }`)<be>
          The total time that is spent on applying fixes to the code.

### CLI usage

Let's consider the following example:

```js [file-to-fix.js]
/*eslint no-regex-spaces: "error", wrap-regex: "error"*/

function a() {
    return / foo/.test("bar");
}
```

> Run ESLint with the *stats* option (`--stats`) and outputting to JSON via a [built-in formatter](../use/formatters/) (`-f json`):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run ESLint with `--stats` and output to JSON via the built-in [`json` formatter](../use/formatters/):
```

                "parse": {
                    "total": 3.975959
                },
                "rules": {
                    "no-regex-spaces": {
                        "total": 0.160792
                    },
                    "wrap-regex": {
                        "total": 0.422626
                    }
                },
                "fix": {
                    "total": 0.080208
                },
                "total": 12.765959
            },
            {
                "parse": {
                    "total": 0.623542
                },
                "rules": {
                    "no-regex-spaces": {
                        "total": 0.043084
                    },
                    "wrap-regex": {
                        "total": 0.007959
                    }
                },
                "fix": {
                    "total": 0
                },
                "total": 1.148875
            }
        ]
    },
    "fixPasses": 1
}
```

Note, that for the simple example above, the sum of all rule times should be directly comparable to the first column of the TIMING output. Running the same command with `TIMING=all`, you can verify this:

```bash

> $ TIMING:all eslint file-to-fix.js --fix --stats -f json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ TIMING=all npx eslint file-to-fix.js --fix --stats -f json
```

...
Rule            | Time (ms) | Relative
:---------------|----------:|--------:
wrap-regex      |     0.431 |    67.9%
no-regex-spaces |     0.204 |    32.1%
```

### API Usage

> Similarly to the example for the [CLI usage](#cli-usage), we can achieve the same thing using the Node.js API, turning on the *stats* option (`stats: true`) as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can achieve the same thing using the Node.js API by passing`stats: true` as an option to the `ESLint` constructor. For example:
```

```js
const { ESLint } = require("eslint");

(async function main() {
    // 1. Create an instance.

>     const eslint = new ESLint({ stats: true });

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    const eslint = new ESLint({ stats: true, fix: true });
```
